SeqApp Help

SeqPup, version 0.5 development release, January 1996

Abstract

SeqPup is a biological sequence editor and analysis program
usable on the common computer systems including Macintosh,
MS-Windows and X-Windows.  It includes links to network
services and external analysis programs.

Features include
     multiple sequence alignment editor
     single sequence editor
     read and write several sequence file formats
     easy hand alignment features including colored bases and sliding
     automatic multiple sequence alignment with ClustalW app
     automatic gel fragment alignment to contigs with CAP app
     phylogenetic analysis of alignments with fastDNAml and LSADT apps
     phylogenetic tree drawing with DrawTree and DrawGram Phylip apps
     consensus, reverse, complement, degap, and distance/similarity operations
     restriction maps
     pretty print of alignments and sequences with boxed and shaded regions.
     translate dna to/from protein using various codon tables
     find strings and ORFs
     automatic preference saving
     internet send mail and sequence analysis services by email
     user-definable links to external analysis programs

NOTICE:  This release is still unfinish, and has bugs.
Please careful of trusting important work to it.  Yet it may
be useful to some of you as is.

SeqPup is being written by Don Gilbert using DCLAP, a free,
portable C++ class application framework, and founded on the
NCBI Toolkit, especially it's Vibrant user-interface section
written primarily by Jonathan Kans.   SeqApp/SeqPup was
started in 1990 as sequence editor/analysis platform on
which analysis programs from other authors could be easily
incorporated into a useable interface.  It was originally
written with Apple Computer's MacApp application framework.

You can obtain this release thru anonymous ftp, gopher or
http to iubio.bio.indiana.edu, in folder /molbio/seqpup.
Versions are available for Macintosh, MS Windows, and
various Unix/XWindows systems.   The Internet locators to
this software are

  <ftp://iubio.bio.indiana.edu/molbio/seqpup/>
  <gopher://iubio.bio.indiana.edu/11/IUBio-
  Software+Data/molbio/seqpup/>
  <http://iubio.bio.indiana.edu/1/IUBio-
  Software%2bData/molbio/seqpup/>

Source code for this software is at
<ftp://iubio.bio.indiana.edu/util/dclap/source/>.
Comments, bug reports and suggestions for new features (see
below) are very welcome and should be sent via e-mail to
<mailto://SeqPup@Bio.Indiana.Edu/>.

Jan 96 - version 0.5b:  added configurable child-app
parameters as HTML forms; fixed file path handling; added
LSADT, DrawTree and DrawGram child apps; fixed save-file-in-
place; better data table and child app handling;  added seq
mask items ; click-top-index-line to select columns; fix for
GCG-MSF format ('-' to '.' translate);  several MS-
Win32/NT/95 updates; Mac file bundle rez & finder-open;
added seq-index display; added variable position grey
coloring; added mswin/xwin sticky menubar; fixed mswin mouse-
shift commands;added mswin menu command keys; fixed
mac/mswin text edit command keys; save pretty print in PICT
format (mac), metafile (mswin - still buggy?)







                           SeqPup
               version 0.5 development release
                        January 1995



¦ SeqPup  Help

SeqPup is a biological sequence editor and analysis program
usable on the common computer systems including Macintosh,
Motif/X-Windows and MS-Windows.  It includes links to
network services and external analysis programs.

This program  has already gone thru several changes since
its start in September 1990.  I don't expect it to mature
for another year or two, as my prime programming time is
holidays and weekends.

Comments, bug reports and suggestions for new features (see
below) are very welcome and should be sent via e-mail to
       <mailto://SeqPup@Bio.Indiana.Edu/>

With any bug reports, I would appreciate as much detail as
is reasonable without putting you off from making the
report.  If you don't have time to send detailed
descriptions of problems, please do send comments and
reports, even if all you say is "Good" or "Bad" or "Ugly".

Please include mention of computer hardware, and operating
system software, including version.  Describe how the
problem may be repeated, if it is repeatable.  If it is
sporadic or only seen once, please also describe actions
leading up to it.  Include copies of data if relevant.

If you need to use land mail, send to

     Don Gilbert
     Biocomputing Office, Biology Department
     Indiana University, Bloomington, IN 47405



¦ Fetching

You can obtain this software via Internet, using anonymous
ftp, gopher or http to the IUBio server at
iubio.bio.indiana.edu.  It is located in folder
/molbio/seqpup.  Versions are available for Macintosh, MS
Windows, and various XWindows/Unix systems.  Please check
the Readme files at this archive for recent news.  Remember
to use binary FTP to fetch the .zip and .gz binary files.

Internet resource locators for this software are

    <ftp://iubio.bio.indiana.edu/molbio/seqpup/>
    <gopher://iubio.bio.indiana.edu/11/IUBio-
Software+Data/molbio/seqpup/>
   <http://iubio.bio.indiana.edu/1/IUBio-
Software%2bData/molbio/seqpup/>

Source code for this software is at
    <ftp://iubio.bio.indiana.edu/util/dclap/source/>

You will need to fetch one of the program archive files for
your computer system, its associated child app archive, and
fetch the essential and optional items from the "all-
systems" folder.   For example, this would be

  all-systems/ SeqPup.help, SeqPup.prefs, tables/*,  seqs/*

plus one of these groups to match your computer system

  mac/ seqpup-mac-68k.hqx and seqpup-mac-apps.hqx

  mswin/ seqpup32.zip 
  mswin/win16/seqpup16.zip and spapp1.zip 

  unix/dec-alpha-osf/ SeqPup.gz and seqpup-apps.tar.gz 
  unix/sgi-irix/ SeqPup.gz and seqpup-apps.tar.gz
  unix/sun-sol2-sparc/ SeqPup.gz and seqpup-apps.tar.gz
  unix/sun-sol2-i86/ SeqPup.gz and seqpup-apps.tar.gz
  unix/sun-sunos4-sparc/ SeqPup-sunos-mostat.gz and seqpup-apps.tar.gz 


The current software distribution comprises the following
items.

all-systems/    mac/            mswin-i86/      unix/

all-systems/
SeqPup.help         - help file (RTF format) essential
SeqPup-help.text    - help file (plain text) optional
SeqPup.prefs        - preferences file (plain text)
                     essential

tables/             - data files used by SeqPup, essential
codon.table    dro.cod   hum.cod   renzyme.table
color.table    eco.cod   rat.cod   tob.cod

appsrc/        - source to applications called by SeqPup,
                     optional
ChildApp.c          captest.seq         fastDNAml.doc
cap.src/       clustalw.doc        fastDNAml.infile
cap2.doc       clustalw.src/       fastdnaml.src/

seqs/               - test sequence files, optional
23+28SrRNA.gb  captest.fasta       fastdnaml.phylip
5srna.gb       dros.ig             testre.map6
blue.seq       ecolac.seq          testreseq.gcg


mac:           - Macintosh, files are in binhex format
Readme
seqpup-68k.hqx                - SeqPup for Mac with Motorola
                     68000 processor
seqpup-ppc.hqx      - SeqPup for Mac with PowerPC processor
seqpup-apps.hqx          - child apps for mac, both 68k and
                     PPC (fat binaries)

mswin:         - MS Windows, files are in ZIP archive binary
                     format
Readme
seqpup32.zip             - SeqPup and child apps for MS
                     Windows, 32-bit code
win16/seqpup16.zip            - Seqpup for MS Windows, 16-
                     bit code
win16.spapp1.zip              - child apps for for mswin

unix:               - Unix, files are in TAR, Gnu ZIP format
dec-alpha-osf/      - DEC Alpha computer with OSF/1 Unix
sgi-irix/           - Silicon Graphics Iris
sun-sol2-i86/            - Sun Solaris 2 on Intel 80x86
                     processor
sun-sunos4-sparc/        - Sun SunOS4 on SPARC processor (or
                     Sol2)
sun-sol2-sparc/          - Sun Solaris 2 on SPARC processor

unix/dec-alpha-osf:
Readme                  SeqPup.gz               seqpup-
                     apps.tar.gz

unix/sgi-irix:
Readme                  SeqPup.gz               seqpup-
                     apps.tar.gz

unix/sun-sol2-i86:
Readme                  SeqPup.Z                seqpup-
                     apps.tar.Z

unix/sun-sol2-sparc:
Readme                  SeqPup.gz               seqpup-
                     apps.tar.gz

unix/sun-sunos4-sparc:
Readme
SeqPup-sunos-mostat.gz   - Motif libraries are included
                     (will run on SunOS 4 or Solaris 2
                     lacking Motif libraries)
SeqPup-sunos-dyn.gz - Motif libraries are not included
seqpup-apps.tar.gz       - child apps for SPARC

Note: At this writing (Jan'96), the systems Sun-SunOS4 and
MS-Win3/16bit are not well supported by development software
that I now use (which supports more current operating
systems).  These systems will continue to be supported, but
due to time constrains on me, they now lag behind others in
updates.

Also, other operating systems will be supported depending on
popularity and requests.  Linux OS on Intel86 will be
supported when I can get hardware incompatibilities with it
and my home Intel PC straightened out.  Let me know your
favorite OS if not supported.


¦ Installing

SeqPup is distributed over the Internet in archive files.
The archive format used is commonly available on the
computer system you use (HQX self-extracting for Macintosh,
ZIP for MS Windows, and tar + Gnu ZIP for Unix).  There is
one primary program, several document and data files,
examples, and child application programs.

The current organization of files used by the program is:
  SeqPup        -- execuable, called "seqpup.exe" in MSDOS
  SeqPup.help   -- this document, in Microsoft RTF format
  SeqPup.prefs  -- settings for the program, in text format.

  tables/       -- data files, required for Restriction
               maps, translate and some other functions.
               These are standard bioinformatics data files
               available and updateable from various
               sources.
    codon.table -- table of codon preferences, in GCG format
    renzyme.table   -- REBase data file, for restriction
               maps, in GCG format
    color.table -- table of color values for display of
               bases
    hum.cod, tob.cod, eco.cod, and other codon preference
               tables that can substitute for codon.table at
               your preference

  apps/         -- a selection of external analysis
               applications.
    clustalw    -- multiple sequence alignment
    cap2        -- contig alignment
    fastDNAml   -- phylogenetic analysis of sequences
    lsadt       -- De Soete Least Squares phylogeny analysis
    drawtree    -- draw unrooted tree, from Phylip
    drawgram    -- draw cladograms, from Phylip


Note for olderSun systems:  This program requires theMotif
run-time libraries that are commonly found on other XWindow
systems.  Motif is standard for the current Solaris 2.4 and
later versions, but is not standard on SunOS 4.  If you have
Solaris 2.3 or earlier, or SunOS, and do not know that your
system includes Motif, then you will need the version with
statically bound Motif libraries (SeqPup-sunos-mostat.gz).

If you have Solaris 2.4 or later, or a version where Motif
libraries are present, you may still need to configure the
system to let SeqPup know where they are.  In a Solaris 2.4
system, where motif lives in /usr/dt/lib by default, this
may be needed to run successfully:
  setenv LD_LIBRARY_PATH  "$LD_LIBRARY_PATH":/usr/dt/lib
  
If you get error messages with this saying something about
an out-of-date library,
try instead putting the Motif /dt/lib in front:
  setenv LD_LIBRARY_PATH  /usr/dt/lib:"$LD_LIBRARY_PATH"





¦¦ Installing preferences

In addition to these two folders and three SeqPup files, the
program will automatically create a personal preferences
file in you computer when you first run it.  These
preferences come from the SeqPup.prefs file.   The
preferences file created on your system will be something
like this
     System Folder:Preferences:seqpup.cnf    - MacOS
     c:\windows\seqpup.ini              - MS Windows
     ~/.seqpuprc                        - Unix

The program will save various configuration information to
this file. You may edit this with a text editor.  You may
delete it and a new one will be generated from the
SeqPup.prefs file.  You may not edit it while the program is
active (any such changes are lost).  When the program is
updated in the future, new preferences are added, using the
label
  [version=123]
to indicate the version number.

The preference file format is as follows:
 - Logical sections are indicated in brackets [section].
 - Variables are denoted with a "name=value" format.
 - Line starting with ";" indicates a comment and will be
ignored.

The current release of the program may require some fiddling
to install correctly.  This
is a known problem, and will be corrected in future
releases.   You will want to look at and probably edit the
file "SeqPup.prefs".

The following sections are important in getting the program
to work right, and may need to be edited.
  [paths]
  temp=
  tables=tables
  apps=apps
  
  [data]
  codon=tables:codon.table
  renzyme=tables:renzyme.table
  color=tables:color.table

If you use this on a Unix system or an MS DOS system,  the
current configuration should work if you start the program
from its folder, e.g.,
     cd /path/to/seqpup/
    ./SeqPup
  
A perhaps better way for Unix or MSDos systems is to set the
environemntal variable called "SEQPUPHOME" to the path to
SeqPup's folder, then you can run the program from any local
directory (v.0.5 or 0.4k)
       setenv SEQPUPHOME  /path/to/seqpup/
       SeqPup

But as is common on Unix, if you want to install this for
use from any directory, you will currently need to edit the
prefs file and put a fixed path to the SeqPup folders in it,
as

  [paths]
  temp=/tmp
  tables=/long/path/to/seqpup/tables
  apps=/long/path/to/seqpup/apps

If you run SeqPup first, then decide to change parts of the
prefs file, you can have all users prefs be updated if you
add the new prefs after a new version number.  This is the
procedure:
a) add a higher version number at the end of the
SeqPup.prefs file
  [version=6]
  
b) add changed preference sections and values after that.
You need not remove or edit the original values (I hope...).

So for instance if the highest verson value in the prefs
file is 5, then add this at the end of the SeqPup prefs to
get all users preferences updated:

  [version=6]
  
  [paths]
  tables=/new/path/to/seqpup/tables
  apps=/new/path/to/seqpup/apps

An important caveat with this:  New distributions of SeqPup
will use new version values to trigger preference updates.
If the new distribution has a lower version value than you
have used, it won't trigger an update.

Child applications are configured for use with the
SeqPup.prefs file.  Please see below the section  Child
Tasks.



¦ Source code and DCLAP

SeqPup is built on an object-oriented application framework,
written in C++, called DCLAP.  This framework is designed to
speed the development of easy to use, complex programs with
a rich user-interface.  At this point, DCLAP is still an
unfinished framework, lacking in documentation.  However, it
is rich enough at this point to build complex programs like
SeqPup.

DCLAP includes the following segments
 DClap/ -- basic application framework, including command,
          control, dialog, file, icon, list, menu, display
          panel, table view, mouse tracker, child
          application, window and view classes.
 Drtf/  -- rich text display handlers, including RTF, HTML
          document, PICT and GIF image format readers.
 DNet/  -- Internet connection tools, including TCP/IP,
          SMTP, Gopher and preliminary HTTP classes.
 DBio/  -- Biocomputing methods, included biosequence,
          restrict enzyme, sequence editor, seq.
          manipulator, seq. output classes.

New applications can be built to employ and reuse these
classes fairly quickly.  Variations on the current methods
are simple to add in the class derivation method of C++.
For instance, new document formats can be added on the Drtf
display objects, and new sequence manipulations can be added
in the biosequence handlers, by building on current methods.

DCLAP rests upon the NCBI toolkit, including the Vibrant GUI
toolkit, which is designed for cross-platform functioning.
The successful genome data browser Entrez is written with
the NCBI toolkit.

All of this source is available without charge for non-
profit use (see copyright below).  The NCBI toolkit portion
is further available for profit use, and such arrangements
may be made for use of DCLAP.

DCLAP will never compete with commercial programming
frameworks, but it has the virtue of being freely available
and redistributable, and includes support specifically for
biocomputing applications.  If you are undertaking a
biocomputing project requiring a rich user interface, and
wish it to run on multiple computer platforms, this may be a
worthwhile choice, especially if you wish to redistribute
your source code for the benefit of the scientific
community.

The DCLAP developer archive is at
<ftp://iubio.bio.indiana.edu/util/dclap/>
Please contact Don Gilbert for further information on using
this framework in other applications.



¦ Copyright

This SeqPup program is Copyright (C) 1990-1995 by D.G.
Gilbert.
All Rights are reserved.

gilbertd@bio.indiana.edu
Biology Dept., Indiana University, Bloomington, IN 47405

You may use this program for your personal use, to provide a
non-profit service to others.
You may not use this program in a commercial product, nor to
provide commercial service, nor may you sell this code
without express written permission of the author.
You may redistribute this program freely.   If you wish to
redistribute it as part of a commercial collection or
venture, you need to contact the author for permission.

The source code to this program is likewise copyrighted, and
may be used, modified and redistributed in a free manner.
Commercial uses of it need prior permission of the author.

Any external applications that may distributed with SeqPup
are copyrighted by their respective authors and subject to
distribution provisions as described by those authors.  At
present this includes ClustalW, by Des Higgins, CAP2 by
Xiaoqiu Huang, and FastDNAml,  written by Joseph Felsenstein
with modifications by  Gary Olsen, Hideo Matsuda and Ross
Overbeek, is copyrighted by University of Washington and
Joseph Felsenstein.

Distribution of external analysis applications with this
program is done as a convenience for users, and in no way
modifies the original copyright.  If there is a problem with
this, instructions to users for obtaining and installing
external applications will be substituted.

No warranty, express or implied, is provided with this
software.  The author is trying to produce a good quality
program, and will incorporate corrections to problems
reported by users of it.


¦ Views

There are four main types of views or displays in SeqPup:

A multiple-sequence view which is the primary display when
you open a sequence document; the single sequence editting
view; various print views which result from an analysis,
like the Restriction map; and dialog views where you control
some function.

Many of these views have dialog controls -- push buttons,
check boxes, radio controls and edittable text items -- to
let you fine-tune a view to fit your preference.  Many of
these views also will remember your last preferences.

When a view has editable text items, including the sequence
entry views, most usual undo/cut/copy/paste features will
work.

Two or more views of the same data are possible.  Some of
these are truly views of the same data -- changes made in
one view are reflected in another. Other views are static
pictures taken of the data at the time the  analysis was
performed -- later changes to the data do not affect that
picture.

¦¦ Aligned multi-sequence view

The main view into a sequence document is the multiple
sequence editor window, which lists sequence names to the
left and sequence bases as one line that can be scrolled
thru.  Bases can be colored (now only nucleic colorings) or
black.  Sequence can be editted here, especially to align
them, and subranges and subgroupings can be selected for
further operations or analysis. Entire sequence(s) can be
cut/copied/pasted by selecting the left name(s).  Mouse-down
selects one. Shift-mouse down selects many in group, Command-
mouse down selects many unconnected. Double click name to
open single sequence view.  Select name, then grab and move
up or down to relocate.

Select the lock/unlock button at the view top to lock/unlock
text editting in the sequence line.  With lock on (no
editting) you can use shift and command mouse to select a
subrange of sequences to operate on.

Bases can be slid to left and right, like beads on an
abacus, when the edit lock is On (now default).  Select a
base or group of bases (over one or several sequences),
using mouse, shift+mouse, option+mouse, command+mouse.  Then
grab selected bases with mouse (mouse up, then mouse down on
selection), and slide to left or right.  Indels "-" or
spacing on ends "." will be added and squeezed out as needed
to slide the bases.  See also the "Degap" menu selection to
remove all gaps thus entered from a sequence.

¦¦ Single sequence view

For entering/editting a single sequence, this view displays
one sequence with more info and control.  Edit the name here
(later other documentation). Bring out this view by double-
clicking sequence name in align view, or choosing Edit from
Sequence menu.

¦¦ Print views

Various analyses provide non-editable displays.  These are
usually save-able as PICT format for editting in your
favorite MacDraw program, or print-able.



¦ Data files

SeqPup uses plain TEXT type files for its primary sequence
data.  These  files can be exchanged without modification
with many other sequence analysis programs.  SeqPup
automatically determines the sequence format of a data file
when openning it.  You have an choice of several formats to
save it as.  As of this writing, the GenBank format is
prefered (see bugs).

The program looks in the folder "tables" for text files
containing various data. At present these files include
"codon.table", "renzyme.table" and "color.table".

There is a "SeqPup.prefs" file which stores various user
options like window positions, mail address, child tasks.
This is described more in the Install and Child Apps
sections.

Various temporary files are created for child tasks,
generally in the :Apps: folder.  Currently you cannot run
the Child Tasks portion of SeqPup from a locked file server
because these temporary files need to be created where the
child applications reside.  Otherwise, SeqPup should operate
from a locked fileserver properly, and can be launched by
several users at once.


¦¦ Restriction Enzyme Table

The file called "renzyme.table" contains restriction enzyme
data, as distributed in REBASE by R.Roberts.  The format
used is identical to that used by GCG software.

     { documentation ...}

Commercial sources of restriction enzymes are abbreviated as
follows:

          A    Amersham (12/91)
          B    BRL (6/91)
          ...
          X    New York Biolabs (4/91)
          Y    P.C. Bio (9/91)

..  {< separates data}
;AatI      3 AGG'CCT        0 !  Eco147I,StuI
>OU
AatII      5 G_ACGT'C      -4 !
>EJLMNOPRSUVX
AccI       2 GT'mk_AC       2 !
>ABDEIJKLMNOPQRSUVXY
;AccII     2 CG'CG          0 !  Bsp50I,BstUI,MvnI,ThaI
>DEJKQVXY
;AccIII    1 T'CCGG_A       4 !
BseAI,BsiMI,Bsp13I,BspEI,Kpn2I,MroI  >DEJKQRVY
;Acc65I    1 G'GTAC_C       4 !  Asp718I,KpnI
>DFNY


¦¦ Codon Table

The file called "codon.table" in folder "Tables" is used for
translation of nucleic to protein sequence, and for
backtranslation.  This file may be replaced with a table of
your choice in the following format (this format is
identical to that used by GCG software codon tables).

     { any documentation... }

AmAcid  Codon     Number    /1000     Fraction   ..   {<
data separator}
Gly     GGG     1743.00      9.38      0.13
Gly     GGA     1290.00      6.94      0.09
...  { continue for 64 codons }



¦ Features

The following topics describe main features found in the
SeqPup menus.

¦¦ File

New will create an align view of sequence data.  New Text
will create a plain text document, which is the format of
the sequence data files also.

Open will open an exising file.   The default choice will
open a file of sequences into a new window.   You can choose
"Sequence, append", or hold down the SHIFT key, to open a
sequence file and append it to an existing alignment window.

Other Open options include opening a plain text file, a file
of phylogeny trees in Newick format (see  Phylip
documentation), or a Gopher document.

Save, Save as, Save a copy in, all will save the current
document to disk files. Revert will restore the open align
view to the last version saved to disk.

Save selection, Saves only highlighted sequences to a new
disk file.  Doesn't affect save status of current full
alignment document.

Print setup, print will print the current view.

Help brings up a view to page thru the help file.

Preferences will set some user preferences.

¦¦ Editing

Undo, cut, copy, paste, clear, select all -- these standard
mac commands will operate on text as well as on sequences in
(hopefully) intuitive, usual ways.

Find, Find same, Find "selection" will search for strings in
text.

Replace, replace same will replace target strings (not yet
enabled).


¦¦ Sequence manipulations

New sequence -- append a new, blank sequence to the sequence
document.

Edit -- open single sequence editting view for selected
items.

Reverse, Complement, Rev-complement -- Reverse, complement
or reverse+complement a sequence. Works on one or more
sequences, and the selected subrange.

Rna-Dna,Dna-Rna -- Convert dna to rna (t->u) and vice versa.
Works on one or more sequences, and the selected subrange.

Degap -- remove alignment gaps "~".   Works on one or more
sequences, and the selected subrange. Gaps of "-" are locked
and not affected by Degap.   Works on one or more sequences,
and the selected subrange.

Lock Indel & Unlock Indel -- Convert from unlocked gaps "~",
to locked gaps "-".  Unlocked gaps will disappear and appear
as needed as you slide bases left and right.  Locked gaps
are not affected by sliding nor by Degap.   Works on one or
more sequences, and the selected subrange.

Consensus -- generate a consensus sequence of the selected
sequences.

Translate -- translate to/from amino acid.  Relies on
Codon.Table data.

Pretty print -- a prettier view of a single or aligned
sequences.  Use these views to print your sequences.
Printing from the editing display will not be supported
fully, and may not print all of your sequence(s).

Restriction map -- Restriction enzyme cut points of selected
sequence.  Also protein translation options.

Dotty plot -- provide a dot plot comparison of two
sequences.

Nucleic, amino codes -- These provide both reminders of the
base codes, and a way to select colors to assocate with each
code (new in v 1.9a).  See below for some discussion of the
two "aa-color" documents that now ship with SeqPup.



¦ Child Tasks


The "ChildApps" menu lets you link SeqPup with external
sequence analysis programs that you or others may write.
SeqPup can be configured to launch any other application,
and to send it sequence data and command information.  When
the child program is finished with its analysis, SeqPup can
open and display results files from the child in a variety
of formats, including text, biosequence, PICT, RTF and GIF.
On Macs, the ChildApps menu requires System 7 to operate.

The general design of child applications is taken to be data
analysis programs that have a simple command-line user-
interface, and that take input data from a file or from the
system "standard input" file (stdin), and that write outputs
to files and to two system standard files "standard output"
(stdout) and "standard error" (stderr).  This is how many
existing analyses programs work, and it is very
straightforward to program this basic kind of user-
interface.

The value of SeqPup joined with these kinds of programs is
that the SeqPup can concentrate on providing an easy-to-use
interface for biologists, and the analysis application can
concentrate on data analyses, without having to add a lot of
software baggage to provide a more usable interface.

A desired addition to SeqPup will be a dialog to configure
new and current child tasks.  However, at present this needs
to be done by using a text editor to change the SeqPup.prefs
file.


¦¦ Configuring child applications

You can add new child apps by editing the text file
SeqPup.prefs.  You will need to update the section [apps]
with a new line for you new app, then install a new section,
[newappname].  You will also need to increase the
[version=#] value, as described above in the Installation
section, for the program to take notice of your changes.

The [apps] section contains a list of child app sections,
and the menu title string.  E.g.,

  [apps]
  clustal=ClustalW Multiple align...

The clustal= line says there is a child app section called
clustal, and its menu title is "ClustalW Multiple align..."

Version 0.5 adds the form=path-to-html-form method for
configuring child apps.
Forms are the recommended replacement to the following
methods.  This new feature needs documenting, but is still
evolving.  It follows the HTML forms standard, though not
all HTML specs are implemented at this release.

See the example HTML forms in the apps folder to find how
these work.

The following variable names have special meaning as Input
tags of TYPE=hidden:
  infile, seqformat, minseq,
  outfile1, outfile2, .. outfilen
  stdin, stdout, stderr, stdcmdin
  
The HTML <FORM> tag is used to specify command-line action
and method to execute the child application.  Currently
Method=localexec is the only method supported.  The
Action="path-to-app  command-line"  statement can be as
complex a statement as the operating system allows for
executing programs.   Include variable names using a dollar
($) in front of the name.  In Unix, this can be a shell
command (later refinements may add to this).

  <FORM METHOD=localexec ACTION="$apps:clustalw
    /infile=$temp:clustal.inseq
    /outfile=$temp:clustal.outseq /output=gcg
    $align $tree $quick $boot $othercmd
  ">

Various HTML INPUT and Select and TEXTAREA tags are
supported for user input.  The NAME="varname" is the name of
variable used within this form.  You can use any unique name
that suits, and typically you put this varname into the FORM
ACTION=statement, or the INPUT NAME=stdcmdin value.  The
VALUE="something" is the value of variable that will be
passed on to child app.  Use the INPUT TYPE=submit to
produce a button to launch the application.   Here are some
examples:

  Program options:<p>
  <INPUT TYPE="checkbox" NAME="tree"
  VALUE="/TREE">calculate NJ tree<p>
  <INPUT TYPE="checkbox" NAME="boot" VALUE="/BOOTSTRAP">
  Bootstrap NJ tree.
  <INPUT NAME="bootval" VALUE=1000 SIZE=6> (# boostraps)<p>
  Other options: <p>
  <TEXTAREA NAME="othercmd" COLS=40 ROWS=2></TEXTAREA><p>
  <INPUT TYPE=submit VALUE="Launch app">

Here are examples of the special TYPE=hidden variables that
SeqPup understands:

 <INPUT TYPE=hidden NAME=infile
 VALUE="$temp:clustal.inseq">
 <INPUT TYPE=hidden NAME=seqformat VALUE="nbrf">
 <INPUT TYPE=hidden NAME=minseq VALUE="2">
 <INPUT TYPE=hidden NAME=outfile2
 VALUE="$temp:clustal.outseq  biosequence/msf">
 <INPUT TYPE=hidden NAME=outfile1 VALUE="$temp:clustal.dnd
 biotree/newick">


The INPUT TYPE=hidden NAME=stdcmdin is a special tag.  Use
it when the application requires complex inputs from the
standard input file.  This currently is used with Phylip
programs.  It is free-form input of any text between double-
quote (") symbols. Use line breaks where appropriate.
Include variables using a dollar ($) with variable name.

A primitive IF-ELSE option is available with the dollar-
question ($?varable) syntax.  This will let you test if a
variable like a check-box is selected. If it is selected,
text following, including other variables will be inserted.
If it isn't selected, additional text, or nothing, may be
inserted.   The basic syntax for this is

  $?varname:true-value:false-value

Here is an example:

  <INPUT TYPE=hidden NAME=stdcmdin VALUE="M
  N
  $horiz
  $newstyle
  $?newstyle:$stylekind:
  $branchlength
  Y
  ">



NOTE: The following descriptions still should work, but may
be eliminated in future versions.

Then the section for [clustal] includes these variables
  desc= descriptive string, displayed in the launch dialog
  path= path to application, using variables defined in
[paths] section
  help= path to help document,  ditto
  cmd= command line passed to application
  infile= path/name of input data file, using variables
defined in [paths] section
  seqformat= format for sequence input data file
  minseq= minimum number of sequences required for
application
  outfile1= first output file, and file format in pseudo-
mime notation
  outfile2= second output file, and file format in pseudo-
mime notation
  ... etc... for more output files.

All the lines which specify file paths should use the
variables defined in the [path] section for an easy way to
make these descriptions portable to other systems.  The
[paths] section specifies variables for file paths then
gives their complete specification on the local file system,
e.g.,
  [paths]
  temp=/tmp
  apps=/long/path/to/seqpup/apps

Then in an application variable use the syntax "$pathvar:"
to insert the local path variable. For example, use
  help=$apps:clustalw.doc
  
This will be translated by the program to
  help=/long/path/to/seqpup/apps/clustalw.doc

If no path is specified, the default path will generally be,
on Macintosh, where the program file was  when launched, and
on Unix and MSDOS, where the command line was executed from.

The command line variable "cmd" should specify files and
other parameters that the child application needs to read.

The current selection of "seqformat" sequence input formats
includes the following:
  genbank, fasta, embl, nbrf, pir/codata, gcg, msf, phylip,
paup/nexus, asn1.

The current selection of pseudo-mime notations known by
SeqPup used to specify the return data formats includes
biosequence formats, basic text and image formats:
  biosequence/genbank, biosequence/fasta, etc.. for sequence
formats
  biotree/newick         - newick style phylogenetic tree,
not yet displayable
  text/plain, text/rtf, text/html  - text file formats
  image/pict, image/gif       - image file formats

Seqformat for the input file now is not in pseudo-mime
format, but may change to that for consistency with output
formats.  That would be "biosequence/fasta" instead of just
"fasta".




¦ Internet

The Internet features of SeqPup let you interchange ideas
and data with people and biocomputing services around the
world.  If your Mac is connected already to the Internet,
you probably are familiar with electronic mail and some of
its uses.

SeqPup includes a selection of network access features in
the developing area of networked biocomputing.  You will
find access to me, at least to get comments and bug reports
to me, very easy.  There is a feature to send and receive e-
mail, as well as mail links to customized e-mail services.
These include searching for sequence similarity via BLAST
and FastA programs on the Genbank/Intelligenetics computers,
fetching sequences, data and software from Genbank and EMBL.

There is now an feature called Gopher, which gives you
access to a wide range of information services now
developing on the Internet.  Gopher is something like Telnet
or FTP (file transfer), but also different.  It includes
some of the keyword searching features of WAIS (Wide Area
Information Services). There are currently several biology
gopher services found around the globe. These include fast
and up-to-date keyword searches of GenBank, EMBL, PIR and
other important biology databanks.


¦¦ Internet requirements

All features of this menu depend on a network link to the
Internet, and
     Mac: MacTCP software from Apple Computer, or
equivalent.
     MS Windows: WinSock.dll software from various vendors
     Unix: TCP should be standard software


If you have problems in general with SeqPup network
functions, make sure that other TCP-based applications work
on your computer before reporting the problem.  You may need
to work with computer support people at your site to iron
out general network problems.


¦¦ Mail Preferences

The mail prefs dialog asks for your return e-mail address,
and your preferred SMTP mail host. These addresses may be
similar.

Return e-mail address:  This is where another person should
send mail so it will reach you.
          Example:  Bob.Jones@Bio.Indiana.Edu
                  or:  bjones@sunflower.bio.indiana.edu

SMTP Mail host:  This is the internet address of the
computer thru which  SeqPup will send out mail to the rest
of the world.
          Example:  Sunflower.Bio.Indiana.Edu


¦¦ Send Mail

Send an electronic mail message.  You must enter an address
to send to, and have entered your return address in the mail
preferences dialog.



¦ Mail-based Search and Fetch

Various network resources provide biocomputing services thru
e-mail.  These include retreiving sequence entries from the
various databanks (GenBank, EMBL, PIR), fetching help
documents, and searching for sequences in the databanks that
match your query sequences.

¦¦ Sequence Searching

Mail based servers for searching databanks against your
query sequence include FastA and BLAST searches for nucleic
or protein sequences at GenBank/IntelliGenetics, and protein
searches at PIR.


¦¦ Gene Prediction

There are, as of Feb 1992, two e-mail based services for
analyzing nucleic acid sequences and predicting gene
structure.  These services use a variety of analyses and
combine them to provide their best "guess" at gene
structure.

Geneid is an Artificial Intelligence system for analyzing
vertebrate genomic  DNA and prediction of exons and gene
structure (1). A prototype is implemented as a fast,
automatic email-response system.

Grail is an interface to a system which will ultimately
provide automated gene assembly from DNA sequence data.
Currently the system provides analysis of protein coding
potential of a DNA sequence.  The coding recognition module
(CRM) uses a multiple- sensor neural network approach  to
identify coding exons than are at least 100 bases long.

Both of these services ask that you register once before
using them.

¦¦ Sequence Fetching

Mail based servers for fetching databank entries include
services from GenBank/NCBI,  Univ. of Houston, PIR, and
EMBL.


¦ Color Selections

You can create your own color selection for alignment
display by choosing the Nucleic codes or Amino codes dialogs
from the Sequence menu.  These dialogs provide color
"buttons" for each base.  Click a button to get a color
picker dialog where you can change the currently assigned
color.   Your selection can be saved to disk file as an
amino color or a nucleic color document.  You can reload
such a color scheme by clicking open this document, or by
choosing it from the File "OpenÉ" dialog.

A few early users of this new version provided two of the
color amino selections that ship with SeqPup.  Here are
their descriptions.


Date: Fri, 28 May 1993 20:07:26 -0500
From: ahouse@hydra.rose.brandeis.edu (Jeremy John Ahouse)
Subject: implemented aa colors for pre-rel seqApp

Don Gilbert (& Phil Carl),
        I have implemented Phil Carl's(*) modest proposal.
Some of the suggestions were not possible, so I made
changes.

        Jeremy Ahouse

Phil's suggestion is interspersed with my additions:

Well, I have (as they say) a modest suggestion.  I suppose
what people
are really seeking are 20 colors for 20 amino acids.  I have
a preliminary
proposal based on classifying the amino acids into chemical
groups and
finding what seems to me to be easy pneumonics for each
group.  Thus
I would propose:


Red for acidic amino acids; Glu, Asp
(since red is a common danger signal and acids are dangerous
(well maybe not amino acids, but it's a start))
hue:        65500
saturation: 65000
brightness: 50000

Blue for basic amino acids; Lys, Arg, His
(blue and basic both start with "b")
hue:        44000
saturation: 65000
brightness: 50000

White for hydroxyl amino acids; Ser, Thr (as in whitewater)
(this was not possible so I chose a cool "whitewater" color)
hue:        33000
saturation: 65000
brightness: 50000

Green for amide amino acids; Asn and Gln
(since glutamine and asparagine rhyme with green)
hue:        22000
saturation: 65000
brightness: 50000

Yellow for sulphur amino acids; Cys, Met
(this one's obvious)
hue:        12000
saturation: 65000
brightness: 60000

Black for hydrophobic amino acids; Ala, Val, Leu, Ile
(Black is the opposite of white and so if white is for
hydrophilic
hydroxyl amino acids black is a natural for hydrophobic
ones)
hue:        00000
saturation: 00000
brightness: 00000

Orange for aromatic amino acids; Tyr, Phe, Trp
(since "orange" sounds a little like "aromatic" and
oranges are aromatic (if that suits you better))
hue:         7000
saturation: 65000
brightness: 60000

Purple for proline; Pro
(since both have "prl" in them)
hue:        51000
saturation: 65000
brightness: 60000

Grey for glycine; Gly
(since both start with "g" and grey is sort of blah-like
glycine)
hue:        00000
saturation: 00000
brightness: 30000

*Phil Carl
Assoc. Director
Program in Molecular Biology and Biotechnology
University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill

======================

Date: Mon, 7 Jun 1993 15:50:09 +0200
From: Heikki.Lehvaslaiho@Helsinki.FI (Heikki Lehvaslaiho)
Subject: aa colors

Hi,

I am including a file with amino acid color codes that are
used in Steven
Smith's GDE. This scheme was not mentioned in the Usernet
discussion, but
I've grown accustomed to it. At least, it is no worse that
any other of the
myriad possible coloring choices.

If you haven't got other schemes in files yet, drop me a
note and I'll see
what I can do.


GDE aa-colors:
                           2 4 - b i t                M a c
COLOR           AA      R       G       B       R       G
B
------------------------------------------------------------
---------
Magenta         AGPST   255     000     255     65535   0
65535
Black           BDENQZ  000     000     000
Red             C       225     000     000     57600   0
0
Blue            FWY     000     000     255     0
65535   65535
Light blue      HKR     000     192     192     0
49344   49344
Green           ILMV    000     192     000     0
49344   0
Gray            JOUX    145     145     145     37265
37265   37265


          -Heikki



¦ Bugs

v0.4 Known bugs and missing features:

General:
 -  Single sequence editor (Sequence/Edit) is very slow for
   long sequences (6,000bases)
 -  Repeated copy/cut/paste of the alignment window entries
   might cause problems.  Copy of sequences between windows
   may lead to problems. Please let me know if you see
   this.
 - copy/cut/paste/undo and clipboard functions may not be
   working as smoothly in as many contexts yet as they
   should be.
 - Sequence menu items not yet ready :  Dot plot.
 - Sequence/translate when done on a subsequence selection,
   will now leave excess nucleic bases in selection?
 - Edit menu items not ready yet: Show clipboard
 - Internet menu needs testing & reworking - I haven't
   tested any of the e-mail services listed since last
   year.
 - Nucleic codes picture shows PICT processing bug --
   misplaced text, and an error in biology -- complement of
   W is W, not S, and complement of S is S, not W.
 -  Rich Text, PICT and GIF Image format displays all have
   various display glitches.  Documents in these formats
   will be displayed for the most part but some RTF or
   images may show mistakes. Some of this is platform-
   dependent.
 - The current release may require some fiddling to install
   correctly (see Installing).
 - improve management of child apps (in progress, e.g., html
   forms).
 - Windows menu should list current windows directly:
   toolkit needs menu handling basics added.
 - Replace-find function is not ready yet.
 - Option dialogs for selecting tables (codon, renzyme,
   color) should allow direct editing of table values.
 - Single edit window key checking beep works on name as
   well as sequence data.
 - Scroll bar is slightly misplaced in rich text window.
 - documentation (this file) is not complete yet.  Need more
   description and examples on how to use the methods.
 - fix child app results - repeated runs sometimes will
   reopen old output files!

MS Windows specific:
 - Text editing in alignment window doesn't track properly
   when window is scrolled.
 - printing has not yet been tested from MS Windows (no
   printer on my mswin box).
 - select-all in align view highlights part of sequence
   lines when it should not.
 - About-app image doesn't display -- due to draw pict bug
   with non-256 color images.
 - rich text display is buggy (bombs on scroll of HELP doc
   !!)

XWindows specific:
 - Text editing in the alignment window (unlock text)
   doesn't yet work -- the sequence disappears in edit
   mode.
 - command keys are not yet supported as on Mac and MSWin
   systems.
 - there is frequently an XText error message written to
   command line or console just before certain XWindow
   operations.  This doesn't seem to cause problems yet,
   and can hopefully be ignored until I trace and squash
   it.
 - fastdnaml  child app fails to return results after 1st
   run?
 - XWindows versions always crash/core dump when Quit is
   chosen.  This is an annoyance but doesn't seem to impair
   use.  I'll track it down.
 - application can get confused at times about which window
   is active and front most.  This is obvious when a
   function such as copy/paste acts in the wrong window.
   Sometimes repeated selection of items in front window
   will un-confuse the app.
 - You will probably need to edit the SeqPup.prefs &/or
   ~/.seqpuprc file to put in fixed paths to tables/ and to
   apps/, and to change the paths to child app data files.
 - There is no printing for X Window systems.  This is not
   really my problem as much as it is the X Window design
   committee's problem.  Among over 25 pounds of X Window
   programming books I have, there is no mention of how to
   develop software for printing from x windows
   applications.   I doubt the XWin committee views this as
   important, but most software users I know like to print
   documents on occasion.  I'll handle this oversight
   sometime, but it won't be simple.  Macintosh and MS
   Windows both provide methods for printing.
 - About-app image doesn't display -- due to draw pict bug
   with non-256 color images.





¦ Coming Features

Here is a list of things which may be added to SeqPup in the
future, depending on your interest.  Please send in your
suggestions!  What do you want to see to make this a good
biosequence editor and analysis program?

Sequence documentation handling.  Currently no provisions
for documentation per sequence.  This will at least change
to a window for any comments and saving it into files (where
file format permits).  Possibly I will put effort into
dealing with the features, references, etc., in a fashion
along lines of Genbank/EMBL documentation structure &/or
Authorin documentation. Your comments on the importance of
this are desired.

Feature table parsing -- pull out subsequences from Gen/EMBL
feature info.

Align, single sequence pretty print -- header, page
numbering user prefs should be added.

Restriction map -- Could use some speed-up.  Some would like
graphic map (i.e., one line or circle w/ cut points per
zyme).

Simple protein analysis routines, better protein handling.

Methods to transparently use networked child tasks (e.g., on
fast compute servers).

add other child apps - dna/prot distance + lsadt phylogeny
analysis,
          primer analysis, others ??
add user-configurable menus - read all menus from config
file?
add disjoint selections to DTableView -- need for copy/paste
among masks
  (using table selection as clipboard for masks)
add variable color display in alignment window, as aids to
aligning:
  2. mask colors (e.g., stem & loop areas for RNA)
improve seq mask operations and usage
  - annotate masks, choose which are used for pretty print,
which for
    align view
add color picker dialog for color tables
add editable data table interface
add name window pane resizer




¦ History

SeqApp was started Sept. 1990 as MacApp sequence
editor/analysis platform  on which analysis programs from
other authors, typically command line  w/ weak user
interfaces, could be easily incorporated into a useable Mac
interface.

Jan. 96: version 0.5 of SeqPup.

fixed Save file in place -- now saves in proper folder, not
  in seqpup folder
improved seqpup folder path finding:
- MacOS: now should always find :tables:, :apps: if they
  exist w/in SeqPup folder, and prefs paths are relative
  (e.g., apps=apps, tables=tables  in .prefs)
- UnixOS: now can 'setenv SEQPUPHOME
  /path/to/seqpup/folder'
- MSDOS : ditto with 'setenv SEQPUPHOME c:\path\to\seqpup'
  NOTE: must use "APPNAME"HOME, so if you change name of
  SeqPup to PeekUp, you need to change env var to
  PEEKUPHOME.
added click-top-index-line to mask sequence column (only
  when sequence mask mode 1..4 is selected in main window
  popup)
added mask-to-selection, selection-to-mask commands -- mask-
  to-selection is not yet useful because base DTableView
  selection methods need to be rewritten to allow disjoint
  selections.
added seq-index display -- lists base number that mouse
  pointer is at
added mac file bundle rez & finder-open, finder-print
added save of pretty print in PICT format (mac), metafile
  (mswin - still buggy?!)
added variable position grey coloring in align display
added mswin/xwin sticky menubar window
fixed mswin mouse-shift commands
added mswin menu command keys
fixed mac/mswin text edit command keys: cut/copy/paste
many updates to mswin version for micsoft win32/winnt/win95
updated fastdnaml child app to new version 1.1.1
added configurable child-app launch parameters
  -- dialogs in HTML.form format; needs more work,
  additions
added dna distance/similarity matrix function
added child apps: DeSoete's LSADT, Felsenstein's DrawTree &
  DrawGram




July 95:  Version 0.4 of SeqPup.
This includes most of the features of its ancestor SeqApp.
Alignment window: shift & slide sequences,
copy/cut/paste/undo sequence entries among windows;
Restriction maps and pretty print output; useable child apps
for mac, mswin,  and unix.

v0.4 corrections:
     - File/Open for non-sequence data (text, rtf, etc.) has
alternate open menu, to distinguish from sequence data.
Added sequence append-open.
     - Cut/copy/paste/undo for align-seq view now available
     - Sequence menu items that are now ready: Consensus,
Pretty print, Restriction Map, nucleic & amino codes.  Some
of these need further work (pretty, remap options).
     - Child apps usage improved, may need more work though.
     - The Mac/68K,  Mac/PPC, MSWin, Unix now do Child
applications.
     - Include ClustalW, CAP, FastDNAml, child apps
     - Restriction map function is extensively revised and
improved.
     - FindORF and Find string functions added
     - Printing for pretty print, r.e.map now functional on
Mac (and maybe MSWin)

v0.4 Known bugs and missing features (see above Bugs section
for fuller list):
     - Character editing (unlocked text) in the alignment
(main) window is not working on Xwindow systems, and may be
bugging in MSWindow and Mac systems.
     - Single sequence editor (Sequence/Edit) is very slow
for long sequences (6,000bases)
     - Sequence menu items not yet ready :  Dot plot.
     - Child Apps fail in various ways on MSWindows and Unix
systems.
        -- CAP seems most likely to succeed completely.
        -- ClustalW and FastDNAml may be launched and run
properly, but SeqPup will fail to automatically open their
results files.
     - MSWindows and XWindows versions are less stable than
Mac versions.
     - XWindows versions reliable crash/core dump when Quit
is chosen.  This is an annoyance but doesn't seem to impair
use.
     - Internet menu needs testing & reworking - I haven't
tested any of the e-mail services listed since last year.
     - Nucleic codes picture shows PICT processing bug --
misplaced text, and an error in biology -- complement of W
is W, not S, and complement of S is S, not W.
     -  Repeated copy/cut/paste of the alignment window
entries might cause problems.  Please let me know if you see
this.
     - There is no printing for X Window systems.

21 Mar 95: Second release of SeqPup, version 0.1.
This release has more parts of the SeqApp program put into
it.  This includes some alignment view manipulations,
limited use of child applications,  some undo-able commands,
choosing data tables for colors, codon and r.enzymes.  This
release also includes much of the basics of GopherPup,
including display of RTF, HTML, PICT, GIF document formats.
However there is still some work to be done to let you open
these w/o interpreting them as sequence data.
This release has just a Mac PowerPPC (SeqPup/PPC) and Mac
68000 processor (SeqPup/68K) versions.  When more of the
basic bugs are worked out, I'll try Sun and MSWindows
versions.

v0.1 Known bugs/missing features:
     - Use of character editing (unlocked text) in the
alignment (main) window will lead to a crash after a few
windows have been opened/closed or other manipulations
performed.
     - File/Open for non-sequence data (text, rtf, etc.) may
well mistakenly identify them as sequence data.  File/New is
probably not doing anything useful, or bombing.
     - Single sequence editor (Sequence/Edit) is very slow
for long sequences (6,000bases)
     - Single seq. editor may be failing in various ways
(I've not looked at it carefully yet).
     - No cut/copy/paste/undo for align-seq view yet (coming
soon I hope).
     - Internet menu needs reworking - I haven't tested any
of the e-mail services listed there since last year.
     - Sequence menu items not yet ready : Consensus, Pretty
print, Restriction Map, Dot plot,  nucleic & amino codes.
     - Child apps usage needs more development to work
smoothly.
     - The Mac/68K version fails when using Child
applications.
     - Only the ClustalW child app is ready for distribution
(may have FastDNAml, CAP, and DNAml soon -- let me know of
programs you would like to see here).

1 Mar 94: First public release of SeqPup, version -1.
It has plenty of bugs and missing features, including:
          no Undo (this is a real bite to those used to it)
          mostly no cut/copy/paste/clear
          limited printing of documents or views
          mostly no align-view manipulations
(move,cut/copy,edit in place, shift, ...)
          no pretty print views
          no restriction maps
          no dot plots
          no ...
          problems w/ window display & keeping track of
active window (x,mswin)
I'll be adding back many of these features from the
Macintosh SeqApp as time permits.


SeqApp 12+ June 93, version 1.9a157+
a semi-major update, and time extension release with various
enhancements and corrections.  These include
  -- lock/unlock indels (alignment gaps). Useful when
sliding bases around
  during hand alignment, to keep alignment fixed in some
sections.
  -- color amino (and nucleic) acids of your choice.
  -- added support for more sequence file formats: MSF,
PAUP, PIR.  SeqApp now relies on the current Readseq code
for sequence reading & writing.
  -- save selection option to save subset of bases to file.
  -- addition the useful contig assembly program CAP,
written by Xiaoqiu Huang.
  -- major revision of preference saving method (less buggy,
I hope)
  -- major revision of the underlying application framework,
due to moving from MacApp 2 to MacApp 3.
  -- fixed a bug that caused loss of data when alignment
with a selection was saved to disk.

5 Oct 92, version 1.8a152+ -- a semi-major update with
various enhancements and corrections.  These include
- corrections to the main alignment display,
- improvements to the help system,
- major changes to the sequence print-out options,
-- including addition of a dotplot display (curtesy of
DottyPlot),
-- a phylogeny tree display (curtesy of TreeDraw Deck & J.
Felsenstein's DrawTree),
-- improved Pretty Print, which now has a single sequence
form and a better aligned sequence form,
-- improved Restriction map display,
- addition and updating of several e-mail service links,
-- including Blast Search and Genbank Fetch via NCBI,
-- BLOCKS, Genmark, and Pythia services,
- updated Internet gopher client (equal to GopherApp),
- editable Child Tasks dialogs
- addition of links to Phylip applications as Child Tasks
- addition of Phylip interleaved format as sequence output
option

11 June 92, version 1.6a35 is primarily a bug fix release.
Several of the  disasterous bugs have been squashed. This
version now works on the Mac SE model, except for sendmail.
No new features have been added.

7Jun92, v. 1.5a?? -- fixed several of the causes of
mysterious bombs  (mostly uninitialized handles), link b/n
multiseq and 1-seq views is better now, folded in GopherApp
updates, death date moved to Jan 93,

25Mar92, v1.5a32 (or later).  First release to general
public.  Includes Internet Gopher client.  Also released
subset as GopherApp for non-biologists.

4Mar92, v 1.4a38 -- added base sliding in align view. Bases
now slide something like beads on an abucus.  Select a
section with mouse, then grab section and shift left or
right. Gaps are inserted/removed as needed. For use as
contig aligner, still needs equivalent of GCG GelOverlap to
automatically find contig/fragment overlaps.

Also added "Degap" menu item, to remove "." and "-".  Fixed
several small bugs including Align pretty print which again
should display.

2Mar92, v 1.4a19 -- fixed several annoying bugs, see
SeqApp.Help, section on bugs for their resolution.  These
include Complement/Reverse/Dna2Rna/ Translation which should
work now in align view; Consensus menu item; entering
sequence in align window now doesn't freeze after 30+ bases;
pearson/fasta format reading; ...

10Feb92, v 1.4a6 -- fix for Mac System 6; add Internet
service dialogs for Univ. Houston gene-server, Geneid @ BU,
Grail @ ORNL; correct About Clustalv attribution.

5Feb92, v 1.4a4 -- limited release to network resource
managers, clustalv authors, testers.

Vers 1.4, Dec91 - Feb92. Dropped multi-sequence picker
window, made multi-align window  the primary view (no need
for both; extra confusion for users).  added pretty print,
restriction map, sequence conversions.   Generalized "call
clustal" to Hypercard-like, System 7 aware menu  for calling
external tasks. Fleshed out internet e-mail objects, added
help objects, window menu, nucleic/amino help windows. Many
major/minor revisions to all aspects to clean out bugs.
Preliminary release to a limited set of testers (1.4a?)

Vers. 1.3, Sept - Dec91. Modified clustalv for use as
external app (commandline file, background task, ...). Added
basic Internet e-mail routines call clustal routine
(preliminary child task)  Many major/minor revisions to all
aspects to clean out bugs.

Jun91-Aug91:  overwork at other tasks kept SeqApp on back
burner.

Mar91-Jun91: not much work on SeqApp, fleshed out TCP
methods (UTCP, USMTP, UPOP).

Feb 1991, vers 1.2? made available to Indiana University
biologists and NCBI biocomputists.

Vers. 1.1, Oct 1990, multiple sequence picker and multiple
sequence alignement window, including colored bases, added
to deal with alignment and common multi-sequence file
formats.

Version 1, Sep 1990. Single sequence edit window + TextEdit
window,  from MacApp skeleton/example source + readseq.




